This
is August the 10th and sitting in the Harrington
Tower interviewing Dr. Brian Cole about his
experiences here, first as a graduate student and
then as a faculty member. Brian, introduce
yourself to anyone who may listen or read the
transcript of this tape. background where'd you
grow up family high school education experience
before you came to A&M okay I was I'm a native Texan
born in Wichita Falls and Moved to Dallas for a
couple of years and then started public schools in
Marlin, Texas, just 60 miles north of College
Station. And so I have fond childhood memories of
A&M back during when it was its traditional self.
And my dad was a football nut, literally. And I can
remember as a child on those few occasions where
there would be a noon game here that I would come
down with my dad and we would go to the game here
until about halftime. And then we would leave and
drive to Waco for a three o'clock game at Waco and
stay there till about halftime and then drive to
Fort Worth or to Dallas to catch a TCU or SMU game
that evening. Now that didn't happen a lot because
of scheduling, but it kind of gives you a sense of my
dad's love for football, and of course I enjoyed
A&M at that time. Graduated from Marlin High
School in 1962. Had the opportunity to be student
body president there, and really enjoyed my
school years there. Worked all through high
school.
I had the privilege of being appointed to West
Point by then Congressman Pogue, who was chairman
of the House Ag Committee. It was interesting
because A&M had been one of the schools that I
considered, but I didn't want to go there at the
time because it was all male. Of course, West Point
was all male, too, but had a little bit different
flavor, so I went there. I had to work pretty hard to
be successful academically there as well as
otherwise, but it was a great experience. I had the
honor of being commander of the company A-1 my
senior year, which meant that as A-1, we always led
all the parades and all the march-ons to the
Army-Navy game and all that kind of stuff. So it was
kind of neat. Marching in General MacArthur's
funeral procession in New York City when he died.
So just lots of opportunities, lots of leadership
exposure And that famous speech that he made at
West Point. Was the spring before I went in. It was
May of 62. But it still had such an impact that when
we got there as plebes that summer, upperclassmen
were still talking about it, I mean, and with some
emotion in their voice. So we knew that it was quite
something to, and of course I've heard it a hundred
times in different situations over time. Did West
Point outfits have nicknames like Aggie outfits?
Did A-1 have a nickname? Not really. Well, some
did.
But they were usually tied to the alphabet. But A-1
did not have one. Most did not. Most did not.
Graduated from West Point in 66 and was
commissioned in the artillery at the time. I had
the opportunity to go to airborne and ranger
school, and then we went to Europe where I was
stationed with a Hawk battery about 17 miles from
the Czech border. And that was a really good
experience, had a lot of great NCOs who educated me
and learned me, as we might say. Spent a year there,
then got reassigned to Bad Kreuznach, Germany, to
the 8th Infantry Division, where I moved in and
took over the, moved in the personnel realm and
took over the personnel services division for
the, for the infantry division. Was there about
eight months and then got curtailed as most
everyone else was during that time to come back to
Vietnam Went to language school. So the Ferris
School and then a year in Vietnam And then back for
about six months at Fort Hood and then selected to
come out of the service at that time and came back to
graduate school, initially to go into public
school administration. What year was this? This
was 1970.
Kind of serendipitous, or maybe that's not the
correct word, but I came back from Vietnam in March
of 70, and was on leave for a couple of weeks there
until I reported into Fort Hood. So during that
time, had come down to A&M to talk to the faculty
here about my application and assistantship. And
I came, and it just so happened that that was the
week that Earl Rutter had died, And he was lying in
state in the systems building and had an occasion
to sort of get a flavor because of that, of the
impact that General Rudder had had. Did you walk
over? I actually went over and described.
Feelings, sentiments that you experienced?
Well, you could tell that there was a very distinct
specialness. It was almost like almost like being
in the Capitol building in Washington when
someone of national stature is lying in state.
Members of the Cadet Corps, from the different
outfits, were standing around, much as they do in
the Capitol building, from the different
services. And each of the military departments
were represented from the Cadet Corps. Of course,
all the flags on campus were at half-mast. It was a
very somber time. But you had a sense that
something special was occurring.
And then after I got out in August, we moved here in
August of 1970. And you have children at this
point? I had one son, and Keith at that time was two
years old, and came back to begin master's work in
educational administration. Now, why did you
pick A&M instead of some other institution? Well,
I had made application to A&M and to Baylor, We
wanted to be close to home, and A&M
offered me the graduate assistantship. And you
thought at that time your career goal was? Was
public school administration. And so I came back
and began working on that. I had to complete my
teacher certification at the time under the old
Jamison Act. And I had like 60 hours in math and more
than enough hours in physics, and so my teaching
fields were math and physics. But I remember being
in the fourth floor of the academic building, and
I'd been four years since I'd done any, you know,
real math. And Dr. Chewy for the math department
was my prof, and it was an advanced calculus class
that I really didn't need. I was just doing it for
getting back. And he was one of these guys that
would write with one hand and erase with the other.
And, you know, there were all these young
undergraduate, because it was not a
graduate-level course, it was a 400-level
course, and there was all these undergraduate
kids just humming along, doing fine. And I knew
that even though I was only about four or five years
old of these kids, that something had transpired
during that time. So... But we made it through. I
see. Did you have to take Texas government? Oh,
yes. That's part of the deal. Texas government and
Texas history. Actually, I took the Texas
government, but I tested out of the Texas history.
But toward the end of that year, Dr.
Frank Hubert, who was the dean of the College of
Education at that time, for some reason... had
noticed me or heard about me or whatever and just
one day out of the clear blue in about April he calls
me over to his office and of course you know I'm a
little antsy about that because Dr. Hubert even
then had a reputation Haskell as you are well aware
so I go over and sit there and Dr. Hubert said You
know, one of the things I've done over the years is
to try to identify promising graduate students
and to bring them into my office as assistant to the
dean while they work on their doctorate. And I
wondered if you might be interested in doing that.
And this is your first year? This is about, this is
the end of my first year. Now what was, what was
your, describe your first impression of him as a
person? Well, pretty intimidating.
Someone that you knew was serious
someone who had a tremendous intellect, someone
who cared deeply about education, and someone
who, by their very nature, you did not want to
disappoint. and who instilled a lot of confidence
by his expression of his confidence in you. Did you
ever later learn who it was that helped him
identify you? No, my guess is it would probably be
Paul Hensarling. I was Paul's graduate
assistant. And of course, Paul and Frank had had a
long professional association. Describe Dr.
Henseling and your work for him. OK. He was a rather
unique guy. Dr. Henseling had been
superintendent at Orange for some period of time.
And I don't know exactly when he actually came to
A&M, but he was one of the professors in the
Department of Education Administration. And Dr.
Hensheling had had a voice problem, a physical
voice problem. At some point, I don't remember
exactly when, but it caused him to talk rather low
and with an airy kind of forced speech.
But he didn't let that get in his way. And he was a guy
that had very high expectations and basically
would lay out, and these are the things I want you to
do, and then, you know, you go forth and do. And had a
pretty close relationship because we didn't have
separate offices back then, and so I actually had a
table right there in his office. Was he the
chairman? No, Hal Hawkins was the chair at that
time. Other faculty members were Les Richardson,
Tim Stennett, and it was a fairly small
department, and Hal.
But Dr. Henshling was the senior man in years? Yes,
yes, yes. And your duties for him? Doing research,
some background publication work. He was working
primarily in the area of school services, support
services, auxiliary services we might call them,
and annually updated a sort of a series of readings
and texts, so I did some work on that. One of my big
responsibilities was to do all the logistical
preparation for the administrative leadership,
what we called the June Conference back then,
which was an annual conference for school
administrators from all over the state, mostly
superintendents and a few principals. And we'd
have 400 or 500 folks come in for that. And had a big
reputation. Over the years, it had developed sort
of a traditional history of typical things that
would go on. And so it was as much a fellowship time
for school administrators as it was for
professional development. And so I did all the
logistics work for that. For Dr. Hensley? For Dr.
Hensley, yes. In that first year? In that first
year, right. That was quite a bit of time devoted
toward that activity. And so then in the spring of
that first year, you have this conversation with
Dr. Hubert, and then follow next what, he gives you
an assignment? Well, he asked me first if I wanted
to do it, and he said the plan would be, he said Jerry
Vinson at the time was the assistant to the dean.
And Jerry was about a year out from finishing. And
Dr. Hewitt said, if you're interested, what I'd
like to do is, beginning in September, is for you to
come over and be a graduate assistant and sort of
understudy Jerry. And then when he graduates
summer of 72, then if everything works out, then
you'd become assistant. Do you remember what the
compensation was? Well, as a GA, it was about, I
have a later interesting story about that, but as a
GA, it was about three and a quarter a month, I
think, as I recall. And what were you and your
family living on? Well, that, plus I had the GI
Bill. Oh, I forgot, sure. Plus, my wife was working
as a teacher's aide at Snook. And just as an
interesting aside, one of her also duties was to
sponsor the pep squad at Snook. And, of course,
this was back in the early 70s during their heyday
of being the Class B basketball powerhouse in the
state. Mm-hmm. And I can remember on more than one
occasion of driving over to Austin to watch the
state finals, one in particular.
Coincidentally, Phil Graham's first wife was a
teacher for whom my wife was an aide, Sherry
Graham. And I can remember the state finals at
Gregory Gym at UT, and Phil was right in front of me.
And, of course, this was early 70s when he was like
an assistant professor of economics. And suffice
it to say that Phil got into the game.
I mean, I had two shows going on. One was the game and
one was Phil. Because if the ref made any call
whatsoever that he felt was inappropriate, I
mean, he was right in their face. It was pretty
interesting, you know. Let me turn this off. All
right. And so you began then? Began that fall. Now,
meanwhile, you're taking a full course load. One
other thing, I remained active in the Army
Reserve. And that played a rather important role
then throughout the rest of my time. Describe that
first year or two. What was a typical week? What all
were you doing? Well, taking how many hours? In
that fall, in that fall I was taking 12 hours, more
than a full load. I was working 20 hours a week as a
graduate assistant. My wife was working full
time, plus we were juggling our young son, because
again, in the later fall, when basketball season
really began, and she had to go to the pep squad,
sometimes it was one or two o'clock in the morning
before they got back in, so I'd have to go and wake
Keith up and go out and get all that kind of stuff.
And then, at least once a month, I was doing a
weekend for the reserve. And where were you all
living? We were living in the Bryan Orms
apartments down on South College for our first
year. Do you remember what the rent was?
I try to put in things like this as a kind of a
barometer. No, but I can give you another
barometer. Okay. Because after that first year,
and we, I made the decision then, let me back up,
because when Dr. Hubert asked me if I wanted to
become his assistant dean, at that time,
professionally, I really had to decide did I want
to stay public school or go higher ed. I had
realized during the course of that first year that
I really felt like I might be able to contribute
better in higher ed than in public school. So it
helped make that decision. But once we decided to
stay, then, and with Keith growing up, we decided,
well, if we're going to be here four years, we need
to try to find the little house. And so in the
Let's see, I guess it was around January. Yeah, it
was during the Christmas break of my first year
with Dr. Huber. that we seriously began looking
for a little house. We found a little house over on
Eagle Pass, which is off of Texas. And there's a
wonderful little two-bedroom house built in
1933. And the lady who lived in it was Mrs. Schmidt.
And her husband, back in the 40s, had been the dean
of the vet school. And she was a wonderful,
wonderful lady. And we really enjoyed visiting
her. And even after we bought her place,
frequently, about every Sunday afternoon for
several months, she would drive by and stop in for a
few minutes. And of course, we welcomed to have
her. But it was a wonderful little place to be a
young graduate student and so forth. What was the
price on that? Well, that was what I was going to
tell you. The price of the house was $17,000. And
Wanda, my wife, to this day, uh, kids me about
remembering when we signed those papers that I was
literally white as a sheet obligating myself to
that kind of, uh, debt, you know. Uh, and, uh, so it
was a great little place. It had a nice backyard. It
was a nice neighborhood during the time, nice
neighbors and, and so forth. But, uh, so it was uh it
was doing all those things of you know family and
school and working and reserve and all that uh so
you began with dr hubert then in the fall of fall of
uh 71 71 and also another graduate assistant in the
office at that time was barry thompson who
subsequently became, obviously, chancellor of
the A&M system. And Barry was also, Hubert had
worked out a deal with Barry. He was doing his
residency, and so he was a graduate assistant, but
he was also at least part-time superintending at
Waco ISD at that time. And so Barry and I developed,
began the development there of a lifetime
friendship and professional association, which
has been very good all these years. And so as it
turned out, Jerry Vincent, who was the assistant
to the dean, Got
a job offer prematurely, it's not really
premature, unexpectedly, to be the director of
the Mahea State School. Well, he was ABD at that
point. Man, I don't know, I was not privy to exactly
what Hubert suggested to him, but Jerry decided to
take that. which meant that he was leaving toward
the end of January of 73. No, 72, yeah,
because I started in the fall of 71, which sort of
upped my ante on moving into the assistant to the
dean thing. Well, my very first assignment as
assistant to the dean was, Hubert had, and I'd been
working on it somewhat, but Hubert had planned a
faculty retreat at the flagship hotel in
Galveston. And so my responsibility was to lay all
that on. And I remember John Calhoun was invited
down, and Dick , they came down as a part of that for
presentations and so forth. It was about a
three-day retreat.
And I was just in the process of sort of moving into
the assistant to the dean role at that time. And I
remember prior to going down there, Dr. Hubert had
discussed with me that I would start at $8,100
working full-time as assistant to the dean,
which, you know, compared to 300 bucks a month,
that's pretty good stuff. This will give you some
flavor of Dr. Hubert. Coming back after we'd come
back from that conference, and I have another
story to tell you about that in a minute, but coming
back from that, after we got back, Dr. Hubert
called me in and said, Brian, He said, I want to tell
you, that was the best conference that I've ever
had. And he said, I attribute that to your work. He
said, it was flawless, dah, dah, dah, dah, dah,
dah. And he said, what I'm going to do is we're going
to raise your starting salary to $9,000. Wow. I
thought, yeah, all right. So
that was a nice little deal right off the bat. And
the aside story I want to tell you, in driving back
from Galveston after that conference, I was
riding with Dr. Hubert. And he had a Willie Nelson
tape in the radio. And Willie was singing
Michelle. And Dr. Hubert got this very nostalgic
look on his face. And after it was over, I said, Dr.
Hubert, I said, that song seemed to mean something
to you. He said, well, let me tell you. He said, back
when I was at UT, I was working and going to school
and all this. And he said, a friend of mine
approached me that they were putting a band
together for the summer to play on a cruise ship to
go to Europe. And he said he won't know if I want to
try out for the band. So I thought about it and said,
well, yeah, I guess I will. And of course, he was
primarily a woodwind person at that point. And so
he tried out for the band, but he didn't get it. But
about a week before the band left, I think it was the
trumpet or cornet player got sick and couldn't go
or what have you. So his friend came to him and said,
Hubert, can you play cornet? He says, well, nobody
can learn. And so, in the space of a week, Dr. Hubert
went to a pawn shop,
got somebody's horn out of pawn, taught himself
how to play the trumpet, and then played in that
band on the cruise ship over. They had some time in
France while they were there, and while they were
in France, he met a Michelle. whom he obviously had
some very fond memories about. That's as far as I
know. I had not heard that part of it before. But
then they then play on the way back. They get back,
and because of his financial straitness at the
time, he then takes the horn back to that pawn shop
and gets his money back. I think that's a great
story. Oh, yes. When you... Started out did he
describe your duties and how well did his
description match the realities? You were to be
the assistant for what yeah basically for budgets
administration Contracting grant activity we
had at the time One two three four five five
secretaries in the dean's office. They all
reported to me. In other words, I was sort of the
office manager as well as, and then I was
responsible for the college budgets and the
administration of all of that, the
administration of all the contracting grant
accounts, all personnel actions, those kinds of
things. Physically, y'all were located?
Physically, we were in the west end of the academic
library, the old library, on the first floor,
where they've now remodeled all that that looks so
nice. Oh, in Cushing. Cushing, yeah, west end of
Cushing, right on the first floor there. And the
College of Education? The dean's office. Dean's
office. That's all that was there. Yeah. Who were
the other professionals? Lannis Hope was the
associate dean for student affairs and Don Clark
was the associate dean for research. Describe
them and their their characteristics and their
manner of. Well, Landis was an educational
psychologist. He was a very interesting
gentleman. Extremely well read. I think I must
have read four books a week of all genre. But at the
time in the college, we had, I'll have to go back in a
minute. At the time in the college, we had maybe a
few hundred students. And so as associate dean for
students, it was not a huge job, but he had other
responsibilities. I think it was a half-time
appointment. And then he was a half-time with the
Ed Psych faculty. But very sensitive, very much
what you think of as a counselor type individual.
had had some interesting World War II experiences
and sort of relived those on occasion. Don Clark
had come to A&M from the Midwest and had done work at
Stout, I think.
I don't remember where his doctorate is from, but
somewhere in the Midwest. And Don had been fairly
active in the contracting grant work, and so his
role was primarily helping faculty through
research and graduate programs. Of course, it was
a new, growing entity. Now the key staff, the chief
of the staff was Peggy Ritchie? Yes. Describe
Peggy. Well, Peggy was what one might think of when
thinking of a a woman who's been in an office for a
long period of time, who knows her job backwards,
forwards, and sideways, who has a wealth of
information, and who people would go to with some
regularity on a whole variety of issues.